---
author:
- |
  Anton Ratnarajah[^1]\
  University of Maryland, College Park
- |
  Dinesh Manocha[^2]\
  University of Maryland, College Park
bibliography:
- template.bib
title: "Listen2Scene: Interactive material-aware binaural sound
  propagation for reconstructed 3D scenes"
---

[]{#into label="into"} Recent advances in computer vision and 3D
reconstruction algorithms have made it possible to generate 3D models of
real scenes in real-time [@bundle; @scannet]. These reconstructed 3D
models are used for ray-tracing simulation [@ray-trace_sim],
surveying [@3d_survey], visual analysis or interactive walkthroughs of
buildings [@rent3d]. Furthermore, many tools or systems are available to
transform real-life spaces into digital models [@{ScanNet++}], which
offer higher visual fidelity than panoramic scans. The resulting static
3D models are used to generate immersive 3D experiences for VR or AR
applications.

Many reconstructed models corresponding to apartments, houses, offices,
public places, malls, or tourist attractions consist of multiple sound
sources (e.g., human speaker, dishwasher, telephone, music). In order to
improve the sense of the presence for a user, it is important to augment
the visual realism with acoustic effects generated by these sources. It
is well known that a user's sense of presence in VR or AR environments
can be improved by generating plausible sounds  [@larsson2002better].
The resulting acoustic effects vary based on the location of each
source, the listener and the environment
characteristics [@liu2022sound]. In practice, the acoustic effects in VR
or AR environments can be modeled using impulse responses (IRs), which
capture how sound propagates from a source location to the position of
the receiver in a given scene. IRs contain the necessary information for
acoustic scene analysis such as the early reflections, late
reverberation, arrival time, energy of direct and indirect sound, etc.
The IR can be convolved with any dry sound (real or virtual) to apply
the desired acoustic effects. Binaural IR characterizes the sound
propagation from the sound source to the left and right ears of the
listener. Unlike monaural IRs, binaural IRs have sufficient spatial
information to locate the sound source accurately. Therefore binaural
impulse responses (BIRs) give an immersive experience in AR and VR
applications. It turns out that recording the BIRs in real scenes can be
challenging and needs special capturing hardware. Furthermore, these
BIRs need to be recaptured if the source or listener position changes.

In synthetic scenes, the IRs can be computed in real-time using sound
propagation algorithms [@liu2022sound; @Savioja2010REALTIME3F]. However,
current propagation algorithms are limited to synthetic scenes where an
exact geometric representation of the scene and acoustic material
properties are known as apriori. On the other hand, generating a large
number of high-quality IRs for complex 3D real scenes in real-time
remains a challenging problem [@soundspaces2].

Recently, neural-network-based sound propagation methods to generate IRs
have been proposed for interactive audio rendering
applications [@fastrir; @mesh2ir; @luo; @inras]. After training, the
network can be used to generate a large number of IRs for 3D scenes.
However, current learning methods have some limitations. They only deal
with the mesh geometry, compute monaural IRs, and do not consider the
acoustic material properties of the objects in the 3D scene. The
material acoustic properties depend on the surface roughness, thickness
and acoustic impedance [@material1; @material2]. The materials in the 3D
scene strongly influence the overall accuracy of the IR by controlling
the amount of sound absorption and scattering when propagating sound
waves interact with each surface in the scene. Moreover, current methods
may not be directly applied to reconstructed 3D scenes with significant
holes.

**Main Results:** We present a novel neural-network-based sound
propagation method to render audio for real indoor 3D scenes in
real-time. Our approach is general and can generate BIRs for arbitrary
topologies and material properties in the 3D scenes, based on the source
and listener locations. Our sound propagation network comprises a graph
neural network to encode the 3D scene materials and the topology, and a
conditional generative adversarial network (CGAN) conditioned on the
encoded 3D scene to generate the BIRs. The CGAN consists of a generator
and a discriminator network. Some of the novel components of our work
include:\
**1. Material-aware learning-based method:** We represent the material's
acoustic properties using the frequency-dependent absorption and
scattering coefficients. We calculate these material properties using
average sound absorption and scattering coefficients for each vertex in
a 3D scene from the input semantic labels of the 3D model and acoustic
material databases. We propose an efficient approach to incorporate
material properties in our Listen2Scene architecture. Our method results
in 48% better accuracy over prior learning methods in terms of acoustic
characteristics of the IRs.\
**2. Binaural Impulse Response (BIR) Generation:** We present a simple
and efficient cost function to the generator network in our CGAN to
incorporate spatial acoustic effects such as the difference in the
time-of-arrival of sound arriving in left and right ears (interaural
time difference) [@ITD] and sound level difference in both ears caused
by the barrier created by the head when the sound is arriving
(interaural level difference).\
**3. Perceptual evaluation:** We performed a user study to evaluate the
benefits of our proposed audio rendering approach. We rendered audio for
5 real environments with different levels of complexity with the number
of vertices in the selected environments varying from 0.5 million to 2.5
million (Fig. [\[audio_scene\]](#audio_scene){reference-type="ref"
reference="audio_scene"}) and asked the participants to choose between
our proposed approach and the baseline methods. More than 67% and 45% of
the participants observed that the audio rendered from Listen2Scene is
more plausible than the prior learning-based approach MESH2IR and
interactive geometric-based sound propagation algorithm respectively. We
also compared the audio rendering using our approach with recorded
IRs [@bras] where the materials are an independent variable.\
**4. Novel Dataset:** We generate 1 million high-quality BIRs using the
geometric-based sound propagation method [@geo_int1] for around 1500 3D
real scenes in the ScanNet dataset [@scannet]. Among 1 million BIRs, we
randomly sampled 200,000 BIRs to train our network. We release the full
BIR dataset in the wav format [^3].

We have evaluated the accuracy of our approach using the captured BIRs
from the BRAS dataset [@bras] and synthetic BIRs generated using the
geometric propagation approach for real scenes not used during training.
Our network is capable of generating $10,000$ BIRs per second for a
given 3D scene on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti GPU. In practice, we
observe two orders of magnitude performance improvement over interactive
sound propagation algorithms.

# Related Works {#related}

**Sound Propagation and IR Computation:** The IRs can be computed using
wave-based [@wave2; @wave3; @waven1; @waven2] or
geometric [@geometric1; @geometric2; @schissler2011gsound] sound
propagation algorithms. The wave-based algorithms are computationally
expensive, and their runtime is proportional to the third or fourth
power of the highest simulation frequency [@wave_raghu1]. For
interactive applications, IRs are precomputed for a 3D scene grid and
IRs are calculated at run time for different listener positions using
efficient interpolation techniques [@interpolate1; @interpolate2].
Geometric sound propagation algorithms are based on ray tracing or its
variants and can be used for interactive
applications [@geo_int1; @soundspaces2]. They can handle dynamic scenes
and work well for high frequencies. Many hybrid combinations of
geometric and wave-based methods have been
proposed [@diffraction_kernel]. These methods are increasingly used for
games and VR applications and can take tens of milliseconds to compute
each IR on commodity hardware.\
**Learning-based sound propagation:** Learning-based sound propagation
methods for IR computation have been proposed to generate IRs based on a
single image of the environment [@image2reverb; @imageRIR; @fewshot],
reverberant speech signal [@anton_meta; @filtered_noise], or shoe-box
shaped room geometry [@fastrir]. Neural networks are also used to
translate synthetic IRs to real IRs and to augment
IRs [@ts-rir; @ir-gan] and estimate room acoustic
parameters [@par1; @para2; @para3]. Learning-based approaches are
proposed to learn the implicit representation of IRs for a given 3D
scene and predict IRs for new locations on the same training
scene [@luo; @inras]. MESH2IR [@mesh2ir] is a sound propagation network
that takes the complete 3D mesh of a 3D scene and the source and the
listener positions as input and generates monaural IRs in real-time on a
high-end GPU. However, the audio rendered using these learning-based
sound propagation methods may not be smooth and can have artifacts.
Prior learning-based binaural sound propagation methods require a few
BIRs captured in a new 3D scene to generate new BIRs for different
source and listener locations in the same 3D scene [@fewshot]. Our
learning-based sound propagation method is more accurate and general
than prior methods.\
**Real Scenes**. The materials in the real scene influence the acoustic
effects corresponding to the scene. The material information can be
estimated from images and videos of real scenes and given as input to
sound propagation algorithms using material acoustic
coefficients [@pygsound; @roundrobin; @schissler2017acoustic]. Other
methods are based on capturing reference audio samples or IRs in real
scenes and the simulated IRs are adjusted to match the materials using
reference audios or IRs [@scene-aware1; @scene-aware2; @scene-aware3].
In recent works, real scenes are annotated using
crowd-sourcing [@scannet] and material acoustic coefficients can be
estimated by mapping the real scenes' annotated material labels to
materials in the existing acoustic coefficient
database [@soundspaces2; @GWA]. As compared to these methods, our
approach is either significantly faster or generates higher-quality
acoustic effects in real scenes.

# Model Representation and Dataset Generation

Our approach is designed for real scenes. We use 3D reconstructed scenes
from the RGB-D data captured using commodity devices (e.g., iPad and
Microsoft Kinect). These reconstructed 3D scenes are segmented and the
objects in the 3D scene can be annotated by
crowdsourcing [@scannet; @bundle]. Our goal is to use these mesh
representations and semantic information to generate plausible acoustic
effects. An overview of our approach is given in
Fig. [1](#overall_archi){reference-type="ref"
reference="overall_archi"}.

We preprocess the annotated 3D scene to close the holes in the
reconstructed 3D scene and simplify the 3D scene by reducing the number
of faces. We perform mesh simplification using graph processing to
reduce the complexity of the 3D scene input into our network. We
represent the simplified 3D scene as a graph $GN$ and input $GN$ to our
graph neural network $Net_{GR}$
(Fig. [3](#graph_network){reference-type="ref"
reference="graph_network"}) to encode the input 3D scene as an
8-dimensional latent vector. Then we pass the encoded 3D scene latent
vector along with the listener position $LP$ and the source position
$SP$ to our generator network $Net_{GN}$
(Fig. [1](#overall_archi){reference-type="ref"
reference="overall_archi"}) to generate binaural impulse response $BIR$
(Equation [\[goal\]](#goal){reference-type="ref" reference="goal"}).
$$\begin{equation}
\label{goal}
\small
\begin{aligned}[b]
   BIR = Net_{GN}(Net_{GR}(GN),LP,SP).
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}$$

We rendered audio $S_{R}$ for the given spatial locations of the
receiver and listener in a given 3D scene at time $t$ by convolving the
corresponding $BIR$ with any clean or dry audio signal $S_{C}$
(Equation [\[eq:render\]](#eq:render){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:render"}). $$\begin{equation}
\label{eq:render}
\small
\begin{aligned}[b]
  S_{R}[t] = S_{C}[t] \circledast BIR[t].
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}$$

<figure id="overall_archi" data-latex-placement="h!">
<embed src="samples/overall_archi.pdf" style="width:90.0%" />
<figcaption>The overall sound propagation architecture of our
Listen2Scene method: The simplified 3D scene mesh with material
annotations is passed to the acoustic material database to estimate the
acoustic material coefficients (absorption and scattering coefficient).
We pass the acoustic material coefficients, vertex positions, and edge
index to our graph neural network (Fig. <a href="#graph_network"
data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="graph_network">3</a>) to
encode the 3D scene into a latent vector. Our generator network takes
the 3D Scene and listener and source positions as input and generates a
corresponding BIR. The discriminator network discriminates between the
generated BIR and the ground truth BIR during training.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Dataset Creation {#dataset_create}

There aren't real-world and synthetic BIR datasets for a wide range of
real 3D scenes captured using commodity hardware available to train our
Listen2Scene. Therefore we create synthetic BIRs using a geometric
simulator [@pygsound] for 3D reconstructed real-world scenes in the
ScanNet dataset [@scannet] to train our Listen2Scene. We preprocess the
3D meshes and assign meaningful acoustic material properties to each
object and surface in the 3D scene
(§ [2.1.1](#mesh_preprocess){reference-type="ref"
reference="mesh_preprocess"}). Next, we sample source and listener
positions and simulate BIRs using the geometric simulator
(§ [2.1.2](#geometric_simulate){reference-type="ref"
reference="geometric_simulate"}).

### Mesh Preprocessing and Material Assignment {#mesh_preprocess}

The ScanNet dataset contains vertex-level segmented mesh. To make the
dataset compatible with a geometric-based sound propagation system, we
convert vertex-level segmentation of the 3D scene to face-level
segmentation of the 3D scene. Face-level segmentation is used to assign
material acoustic coefficients to each surface in the 3D scene. Many of
the meshes in the ScanNet dataset have holes in the surface boundary and
the ceiling is not present. The holes can prevent some of the sound rays
from reflecting back to the listener and result in generating
unrealistic acoustic effects using the ray tracing-based geometric sound
propagation algorithm. We compute the convex hull of the overall 3D
scene mesh and merge it with the original mesh to close the holes in the
outer surface boundaries. We fill small holes on internally separated
spaces using fill_holes() function in the trimesh library [@trimesh].

The ScanNet dataset also contains the semantic annotation (i.e.,
instance-level object category labels such as dish rack, wall, laundry
basket etc.) for every 3D scene. We use the absorption coefficient
acoustic database with more than 2000 materials [@kling_2018] to get the
absorption coefficient of each material in the ScanNet 3D
reconstructions. We do not always find exact ScanNet object labels in
the acoustic database. Therefore, we use the natural language processing
(NLP) technique to find the closest matching material in the acoustic
database for every ScanNet object label and assign its absorption
coefficient to the ScanNet object label. To find the closest matching
material, we encode the object labels in ScanNet and material names in
the acoustic database into fixed-length sentence
embeddings [@mishra2019survey]. Transformer-based sentence embedding
vectors are close in cosine similarity distance for sentences with
similar meaning and outperform in many NLP
tasks [@sentence-transformer]. We use the Microsoft pre-trained sentence
transformer model to encode materials into 768-dimensional sentence
embedding. We use the cosine similarity of the ScanNet object labels and
materials in the acoustic database and assign the closest materials
absorption coefficients to the objects in the ScanNet.

In addition to absorption coefficients, we need scattering coefficients
for geometric sound propagation. The scattering coefficients are not
available in the acoustic database [@kling_2018]. Therefore, we adapt
the sampling approach proposed in GWA [@GWA]. We fit a Gaussian
distribution by calculating the mean and standard deviation of 37 sets
of scattering coefficients collected from the BRAS benchmark [@bras] and
we sample randomly from the distribution for every 3D scene.

### Geometric Sound Propagation {#geometric_simulate}

For every 3D scene, we perform grid sampling with 1m spacing in all
three dimensions. We also ensure that there is a minimum gap of $0.2$ m
between the sampled position and objects in the scene to prevent
collisions. The number of grid samples varies with the dimension of the
3D scene. We randomly place $10$ sources in the grid sampled locations
and the rest of the samples are assigned to listener locations. We
perform geometric simulations for every combination of listener and
source positions. We use $20,000$ rays for geometric propagation and the
simulation stops when the maximum depth of specular or diffuse
reflection is 2000 or the ray energy is below the hearing threshold.

# OUR LEARNING APPROACH

In this section, we present the details of our learning method. Our
approach learns to generate BIRs for 3D reconstructed real scenes, which
may have noise or holes. We first present our approach to representing
the topology and material details of the 3D scene using our graph neural
network (§ [3.1](#3d_represent){reference-type="ref"
reference="3d_represent"}). Next, we present our overall architecture,
which takes the 3D scene and generates plausible BIRs and training
details (§ [3.2](#bir){reference-type="ref" reference="bir"}).

<figure id="mesh_simplification" data-latex-placement="h!">

<figcaption>The 3D reconstruction of the real scene from the ScanNet
(a); object category-level segmentation of the 3D scene with each
category is represented by a different color (b); the modified mesh
after closing the holes using convex hull (c); the simplified mesh with
object-level segmentation information preserved (d); we observe that
high-level object shapes (e.g., bed, office chair, wooden table, etc.)
and materials are preserved even after simplifying the mesh to 2.5% of
the original size.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="graph_network" data-latex-placement="h!">
<embed src="samples/graph_network.pdf" style="width:90.0%" />
<figcaption>Our network architecture represents a 3D scene as an
8-dimensional latent vector. The vertex positions and material
properties are combined to produce the node features. We pass the edge
index and node features from the 3D scene as input to the graph encoder.
The graph encoder consists of 3 graph layers (L1, L2, and L3). The
channel-wise average and the channel-wise maximum of the node features
in each layer are aggregated and passed to linear layers. Linear layers
output a 3D scene latent vector.</figcaption>
</figure>

## 3D Scene Representation {#3d_represent}

The ScanNet dataset represents the RGB-D data collected from the 3D
scene in the form of a 3D mesh. The shapes of the objects in the 3D
scene are represented using the vertices and triangular faces in the 3D
Cartesian coordinates. The ScanNet dataset also provides object category
labels at the vertex level. We perform the mesh pre-processing and
material assignment approach as mentioned in
§ [2.1.1](#mesh_preprocess){reference-type="ref"
reference="mesh_preprocess"}. To reduce the size and complexity of the
data passed to the neural network while preserving high-level object
details, we adapt and modify prior work [@mesh2ir] by performing mesh
simplifications using PyMeshlab's implementation of the quadratic-based
edge collapse mesh simplification algorithm [@pymeshlab]. We simplify
the meshes to have only 2.5% of the initial number of faces. The mesh
simplification algorithm can simplify the mesh while preserving the
vertex-level segmentation of the mesh
(Fig. [2](#mesh_simplification){reference-type="ref"
reference="mesh_simplification"}). The simplified meshes typically have
around 10,000 faces.

In Fig. [2](#mesh_simplification){reference-type="ref"
reference="mesh_simplification"}, we observe that segmented mesh
interpolates the nearby materials to the closed holes (e.g., holes near
the floor are assigned to materials of the floor and the material is
represented in green). We observe that even after mesh simplification to
2.5% of the original size, high-level object structures are preserved.

The triangular mesh of the 3D scene can be represented using graph
$G =\langle V,E \rangle$, where $V$ represents the 3D Cartesian
coordinates of the set of vertices/nodes and $E$ is the connectivity of
each node (edge index). The vertex coordinates of three dimensions are
features of the node in a graph. To add the material properties of the
3D scene, we increase the node feature dimension to five. The material
properties can be represented using the material's absorption
coefficient and scattering coefficient. The absorption coefficient
represents how much sound can be absorbed by the material. Metal absorbs
the least sound and has a very low coefficient. A cushion is a
sound-absorbing material and has a high coefficient. The scattering
coefficient represents the roughness of the material's surface. When the
surface is rough, the sound will be scattered in all directions and has
a high coefficient; smooth surfaces have a low coefficient value. The
absorbing and scattering coefficients are frequency-dependent
coefficients. The coefficients are defined for the 8-octave bands
between 62.5 Hz and 8000 Hz. To reduce the dimensionality of the
coefficients, we calculate the average coefficients by taking the
coefficients at 500 Hz and 1000 Hz. We show the benefit of our approach
of calculating average coefficients at 500 Hz and 1000 Hz in
§ [5.2](#acc_analysis){reference-type="ref" reference="acc_analysis"}.
In many practical applications, the average value of room acoustics
parameters like reverberation time is used for analysis instead of all
the values at different octave
bands [@scene-aware3; @soundspaces2; @ts-rir]. We increase the node
features $V$ by combining $(x,y,z)$ Cartesian coordinates of the vertex
with the average absorption coefficient $ab$ and average scattering
coefficient $sc$ ($V = [x,y,z,ab,sc]$).

We input node features and edge index to the graph encoder network to
encode the 3D scene to a low dimensional space. The encoder network has
3 layers. In each layer, the graph convolution layer [@GCN] is used to
encode the node features
(Equation [\[overall_networ3\]](#overall_networ3){reference-type="ref"
reference="overall_networ3"}). We gradually reduce the size of the graph
by dropping the number of node features to 0.6 times the original number
of node features in each layer using the graph pooling layer.

In Equation [\[overall_networ3\]](#overall_networ3){reference-type="ref"
reference="overall_networ3"}, the adjacency matrix representing the edge
index of the 3D scene ($A$) and the identity matrix $I$ are aggregated
to calculate $\hat{A}$ ($\hat{A}  = A + I$). Each column of $\hat{A}$ is
summed to get diagonal matrix $\hat{D}$
($\hat{D}_{ii}  = \sum_{j} \hat{A}_{ij}$). $W^{(n)}$ is a trainable
weight matrix for layer $n$. Node features at layers $n$ and $n+1$ are
$N_{F}^{(n)}$ and $N_{F}^{(n+1)}$, respectively. $$\begin{equation}
\label{overall_networ3}
\small
\begin{aligned}[b]
   N_{F}^{(n+1)} = \sigma(\hat{D}^{-\frac{1}{2}}\hat{A}\hat{D}^{-\frac{1}{2}}N_{F}^{(n)}W^{(n)}),
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}$$ The output of the graph convolution layer is passed to
the graph pooling layers [@Kpool1; @Kpool2] to simplify the graph by
reducing the node features and edge index. The graph pooling layer
initially calculates the square of the adjacency matrix
($A_{new}^{(n)} = A^{(n)} A^{(n)}$) to increase the graph connectivity
and is used to choose the top N node features. The adjacency matrix
$A_{new}^{(n)}$ prevents isolated edges in the graph encoded 3D scene
when choosing top N node features from the input graph and discarding
other features.

We calculate the channel-wise average and channel-wise maximum of the
output node features in each graph layer in the graph encoder network.
We aggregate the channel-wise average and channel-wise maximum
separately over the 3 layers. We concatenate the aggregated maximum and
aggregated average values and pass them as input to a set of linear
layers. We concatenate the learned features in each layer to ensure that
the linear layers use all the learned features to construct an accurate
3D scene latent vector of dimension 8 as an output from the linear
layer.

## BIR Generation {#bir}

We use a one-dimensional modified conditional generative adversarial
network (CGAN) to generate BIRs. The standard CGAN
architectures [@CGAN1; @CGAN2] generate multiple different samples
corresponding to input condition $y$ by changing the input random noise
vector $z$. In our CGAN architecture, we only input the condition $y$ to
generate a single precise output. Our CGAN network takes a 3D scene
latent vector as the input condition and generates a single precise BIR.
We propose a novel cost function to trigger the network to generate
binaural effects such as interaural level difference (ILD) and
interaural time difference (ITD) accurately.

We extend the IR preprocessing approach proposed in MESH2IR to make the
network learn to generate BIRs with large variations of standard
deviation (SD) efficiently. In
§ [2.1](#dataset_create){reference-type="ref"
reference="dataset_create"}, we generate high-fidelity BIRs with a
sampling rate of 48,000 Hz. We initially downsample the BIRs to 16,000
Hz to represent a longer duration of BIRs. We train our network to
generate around 0.25 seconds (3968 samples) of BIR to reduce the
complexity of the network. Our architecture can be easily modified to
train the network to generate any duration of BIRs. The complexity of
our network changes linearly with the duration of generated BIRs. We
calculate the SD of the BIR and divide the BIR with SD to have fewer
variations over training samples. We replicate the SD 128 times and
concatenate it towards the end of the BIR. Therefore, each channel of
the preprocessed BIR will have 4096 samples (3968+128). We train our
network to generate preprocessed BIRs. Later, we can recover the
original BIR by removing SD represented in the last 128 samples, getting
the average of SD values, and multiplying the first 3968 samples by the
average SD value. We get the average SD over 128 samples to reduce the
error of the recovered SD.

Our CGAN architecture consists of a generator network ($G$) and a
discriminator network ($D$)
(Fig. [1](#overall_archi){reference-type="ref"
reference="overall_archi"}). We pass the 3D scene information
$\Gamma_{S}$ consisting of mesh topology and materials of the 3D scenes
represented using a latent vector, and the listener and source position
as an input to $G$. We train the $G$ and the $D$ in our CGAN
architecture using our created BIRs
(§ [2.1](#dataset_create){reference-type="ref"
reference="dataset_create"}) and $\Gamma_{S}$ in the data distribution
$p_{data}$. We train $G$ to minimize the objective function
$\mathcal{L}_{G}$ and the $D$ to maximize the objective function
$\mathcal{L}_{D}$ alternatingly.

**Generator Objective Function ($\mathcal{L}_{G}$) :** The
$\mathcal{L}_{G}$ is minimized during training to generate accurate BIRs
for the given condition $\Gamma_{S}$. The $\mathcal{L}_{G}$
(Equation [\[generator_loss\]](#generator_loss){reference-type="ref"
reference="generator_loss"}) consists of modified CGAN error
($\mathcal{L}_{CGAN}$), BIR error ($\mathcal{L}_{BIR}$), ED error
($\mathcal{L}_{ED}$), and mean square error ($\mathcal{L}_{MSE}$). The
contribution of each individual error is controlled using the weights
$\lambda_{BIR}$, $\lambda_{ED}$ and $\lambda_{MSE}$: $$\begin{equation}
\label{generator_loss}
\small
\begin{aligned}[b]
    \mathcal{L}_{G} = \mathcal{L}_{CGAN} + \lambda_{BIR} \; \mathcal{L}_{BIR} + \lambda_{ED} \; \mathcal{L}_{ED} + \lambda_{MSE} \; \mathcal{L}_{MSE}.
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}$$

The modified CGAN error is minimized when the BIRs generated using $G$
are difficult to differentiate from the ground truth BIRs by $D$ for
each 3D scene $\Gamma_{S}$: $$\begin{equation}
\label{CGAN_loss}
\small
\begin{aligned}[b]
    \mathcal{L}_{CGAN} = \mathbb{E}_{\Gamma_{S} \sim p_{data}}[\log(1 - D(G(\Gamma_{S}),\Gamma_{S}))].
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}$$ The time of arrival of the direct signal and the
magnitude levels of the left and right channels of the BIRs vary
significantly with the direction of the sound source. To make sure the
network captures the relative variation of the IRs in the left and right
channels, we propose the BIR error formulation.

$$\begin{equation}
\label{bir_loss}
\small
\begin{aligned}[b]
    \mathcal{L}_{BIR} = \mathbb{E}_{(B_{G},\Gamma_{S}) \sim p_{data}}[\mathbb{E}[((B_{LN}(\Gamma_{S},s) - B_{RN}(\Gamma_{S},s)) %\\
    - (B_{LG}(\Gamma_{S},s) - B_{RG}(\Gamma_{S},s)))^{2}]],
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}$$

where $B_{LN}$ and $B_{RN}$ are the left and right channels of the BIRs
generated using our network and $B_{LG}$ and $B_{RG}$ are the left and
right channels of the ground truth BIRs.

The energy remaining in the BIR ($b$) with respect to the time $t_{i}$
seconds and at frequency band with center frequency $f_{c}$ Hz
(Equation [\[EDRelief\]](#EDRelief){reference-type="ref"
reference="EDRelief"}) is described using energy decay relief
(ED) [@EDR; @EDC]. In
Equation [\[EDRelief\]](#EDRelief){reference-type="ref"
reference="EDRelief"}, the bin $c$ of the short-time Fourier transform
of $b$ at time $t$ is defined as $H(b,t,c)$. The ED curves decay
smoothly over time and they can be converted into an \"equivalent
IR\" [@energycurve1]. In previous works [@mesh2ir; @anton_meta], it is
observed that ED helps the model to converge. $$\begin{equation}
\label{EDRelief}
\small
\begin{aligned}[b]
  ED(b,t_{i},f_c)  = \sum_{t=i}^T |H(b,t,c)|^2.
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}$$ The ED curves reduce exponentially over time. In
previous works [@mesh2ir], the mean square error (MSE) between the ED
curves of the ground truth BIR ($B_{G}$) and the generated BIR ($B_{N}$)
is calculated. This approach does not capture the latter part of ED
curves accurately. Therefore we compare the log of the ED curves between
ground truth and generated BIRs for each sample ($s$) as follows:

$$\begin{equation}
\label{ed_loss}
\small
\begin{aligned}[b]
    \mathcal{L}_{ED} = \mathbb{E}_{(B_{G},\Gamma_{S}) \sim p_{data}} [\mathbb{E}_{c \sim C}[\mathbb{E}[(\log(ED(B_{G}(\Gamma_{S}),c,s)) %\\
    - \log(ED(B_{N}(\Gamma_{S}),c,s)))^{2}]]].
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}$$

To capture the structures of the BIR, we also calculate MSE error in the
time domain. For each 3D scene $\Gamma_{S}$ we compare $B_{G}$ and
$B_{N}$ over the samples ($s$) of BIR as follows: $$\begin{equation}
\label{mse_loss}
\small
\begin{aligned}[b]
    \mathcal{L}_{MSE} = \mathbb{E}_{(B_{G},\Gamma_{S}) \sim p_{data}}[\mathbb{E}[(B_{G}(\Gamma_{S},s) - B_{N}(\Gamma_{S},s))^{2}]].
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}$$

**Discriminator Objective Function ($\mathcal{L}_{D}$) :** The
discriminator ($D$) is trained to maximize the objective function
$\mathcal{L}_{D}$
(Equation [\[discriminator_loss\]](#discriminator_loss){reference-type="ref"
reference="discriminator_loss"}) to differentiate the ground truth BIR
($B_{G}$) and the BIR generated using the generator ($G$) during
training for each 3D scene $\Gamma_{S}$. $$\begin{equation}
\label{discriminator_loss}
\small
\begin{aligned}[b]
    \mathcal{L}_{D} = \mathbb{E}_{(B_{G},\Gamma_{S}) \sim p_{data}}[\log(D(B_{G}(\Gamma_{S}),\Gamma_{S}))] 
    + \mathbb{E}_{\Gamma_{S} \sim p_{data}}[\log(1 - D(G(\Gamma_{S}),\Gamma_{S}))].
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}$$

**Network Architecture and Training:** We extend the standard time
domain Generator ($G$) and Discriminator ($D$) architectures proposed
for monaural IR generation [@fastrir; @mesh2ir]. We modify $G$ to take
our 3D scene latent vector of 8 dimensions
(Fig. [3](#graph_network){reference-type="ref"
reference="graph_network"}) and the source and listener positions in 3D
Cartesian coordinates. Our $G$ takes 14-dimensional conditional vectors
and generates 4096x2 preprocessed BIR as output. We also modify our $D$
to differentiate between two channel ground truth and generated BIRs. We
train all networks with a batch size of 96 using an RMSprop optimizer.
The hyperparameter is chosen manually by looking at how the network
converges at the initial epochs. We initially started with a learning
rate of 8 x $10^{-5}$, and the learning rate decayed to 0.7 of its
previous value every 7 epochs. We trained our network for 100 epochs.

# Ablation Experiments {#ablation}

We perform ablation experiments to analyze the contribution of our
proposed BIR error
(Equation [\[bir_loss\]](#bir_loss){reference-type="ref"
reference="bir_loss"}) and Energy Decay (ED) error
(Equation [\[ed_loss\]](#ed_loss){reference-type="ref"
reference="ed_loss"}) in training our network. We also analyze the
performance of the network with and without closing holes in the 3D
mesh. We generated 900 BIRs for 20 real testing environments for our
ablation study.\

## BIR Error

Our BIR error (Equation [\[bir_loss\]](#bir_loss){reference-type="ref"
reference="bir_loss"}) helps to generate binaural acoustic effects by
incorporating magnitude level differences between the left and right
channels of BIRs. In Fig. [4](#BIR_ablation){reference-type="ref"
reference="BIR_ablation"}, we plot the difference between the left and
right channels of the ED curve of BIRs generated using a geometric-based
approach, Listen2Scene and Listen2Scene approach trained without BIR
error (Listen2Scene-No-BIR). We can observe that incorporating BIR error
reduces the gap between the geometric approach (ground truth) and our
Listen2Scene.\

<figure id="BIR_ablation" data-latex-placement="h!">
<embed src="samples/BIR_NEW-eps-converted-to.pdf" style="width:80.0%" />
<figcaption>The normalized difference in energy decay (ED) curves of
left and right channels of BIR. The BIRs are generated using the
geometric method, Listen2Scene and Listen2Scene-No-BIR (Listen2Scene
trained without BIR error). We observe that the ED curve difference of
Listen2Scene closely matches the geometric method.</figcaption>
</figure>

## ED Error

We trained our Listen2Scene network with the ED error proposed in
MESH2IR [@mesh2ir] (Listen2Scene-ED) and our proposed ED error
(Equation [\[ed_loss\]](#ed_loss){reference-type="ref"
reference="ed_loss"}). We calculated the MSE between the normalized ED
curves of the ground truth BIRs from the geometric-based approach and
the generated BIRs over the center frequencies 125Hz, 500Hz, 1000Hz,
2000Hz and 4000 Hz covering voice frequency and reported in
Table [1](#ED_table_loss){reference-type="ref"
reference="ED_table_loss"}. We can see that MSE of the normalized ED
curves in the testing environment is low for our proposed ED error
(Listen2Scene). Fig. [5](#ED_ablation){reference-type="ref"
reference="ED_ablation"}, shows the normalized ED curves of the left
channel BIR from the geometric-based method, Listen2Scene and
Listen2Scene-ED at 2000Hz. We can see that the ED curve of
Listen2Scene-ED diverges from the geometric-based method after 0.1
seconds.\

::: {#ED_table_loss}
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+---+
| **Method**       | **Frequency**                                                |   |
+:=================+:=========:+:=========:+:==========:+:==========:+:==========:+:=:+
| (r1pt)2-6        | **125Hz** | **500Hz** | **1000Hz** | **2000Hz** | **4000Hz** |   |
+------------------+-----------+-----------+------------+------------+------------+---+
| Listen2Scene-ED  | 2.58      | 3.28      | 3.99       | 4.16       | 4.23       |   |
+------------------+-----------+-----------+------------+------------+------------+---+
| **Listen2Scene** | **2.50**  | **2.93**  | **3.54**   | **3.56**   | **3.56**   |   |
+------------------+-----------+-----------+------------+------------+------------+---+

: The MSE error between the normalized energy decay (ED) curves of the
ground truth BIRs from the geometric sound propagation algorithm and the
generated BIRs from our Listen2Scene and Listen2Scene trained with ED
error proposed in MESH2IR [@mesh2ir] (Listen2Scene-ED). We calculate the
MSE over the center frequencies 125Hz, 500Hz, 1000Hz, 2000Hz and 4000
Hz. The best results are shown in **bold**
:::

<figure id="ED_ablation" data-latex-placement="h!">
<embed src="samples/EDC_new-eps-converted-to.pdf" style="width:80.0%" />
<figcaption>The normalized energy decay (ED) curve of the BIRs (left
channel) generated using the geometric-based method, Listen2Scene and
Listen2Scene-ED (Listen2Scene trained with ED error proposed in
MESH2IR <span class="citation" data-cites="mesh2ir"></span>) at 2000 Hz.
We can see that the ED curve of Listen2Scene matches the geometric
method for the entire duration while the ED curve of Listen2Scene-ED
starts diverging after 0.1 seconds.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Closed and Open Mesh Models

We trained and evaluated our Listen2Scene network using the default 3D
mesh with holes (Listen2Scene-Hole) and a closed mesh using our proposed
approach (§ [2.1.1](#mesh_preprocess){reference-type="ref"
reference="mesh_preprocess"}). We can see in
Table [\[tab:plot\]](#tab:plot){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:plot"} that the BIRs generated using Listen2Scene match
the geometric-based sound propagation algorithm.
Fig. [6](#hold_mesh){reference-type="ref" reference="hold_mesh"}, shows
the left channel of the BIR from the geometric-based approach and the
corresponding BIR from Listen2Scene-Hole. We can see that the BIRs from
the geometric-based approach and Listen2Scene-Hole are significantly
different.

<figure id="hold_mesh" data-latex-placement="h!">

<figcaption>The left channel of the BIR generated using a
geometric-based sound propagation algorithm and our Listen2Scene
approach without closing the holes (Listen2Scene-Hole). We can see that
the BIR from Listen2Scene-Hole significantly varies from the
geometric-based approach.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="bras_becnhmark" data-latex-placement="h!">

<figcaption>The normalized energy decay curves (EDC) of the captured
BIRs and the BIRs generated using our approach with material
(Listen2Scene) and without material (Listen2Scene-No-Mat) for the 3D
scenes in BRAS ((a),(b)). We plot the EDC for the BIRs from the chamber
music hall ((c),(d)) and auditorium ((e),(f)). We observe that the EDC
of Listen2Scene is closer to the EDC of captured BIRs.</figcaption>
</figure>

::: table*
:::

::: table*
:::

# ACOUSTIC EVALUATION

## BRAS Benchmark

We use the BRAS benchmark [@bras] to evaluate the contribution of
material properties to the accuracy of the BIR generated using our
Listen2Scene method. The BRAS contains a complete scene description,
including the captured BIRs (i.e. ground truth) and the 3D models with
semantic annotations for a wide range of scenes. We trained our approach
without including the material properties (Listen2Scene-No-Mat) and
including material properties (Listen2Scene). We evaluate our approach
using recorded BIRs from the chamber music hall and auditorium
(Fig. [7](#bras_becnhmark){reference-type="ref"
reference="bras_becnhmark"}). We generated BIRs corresponding to the
source and listener positions in the same 3D models and compared the
accuracy. We plot the normalized early reflection energy decay curves
(EDC) of the captured BIRs and the BIRs generated using our models
(Fig. [7](#bras_becnhmark){reference-type="ref"
reference="bras_becnhmark"}). The EDC describes the amount of energy
remaining in the BIR with respect to time [@EDC]. We observe that in 2
different scenarios, adding material improves the energy decay pattern
of the BIRs. We calculated the mean absolute error (MAE) between the EDC
of captured BIRs and generated BIRs. MAE decreases by 3.6% for the
medium room and 6.6% for the large room.\

## Accuracy Analysis {#acc_analysis}

We quantitatively evaluate the accuracy of our proposed approach using
standard acoustic metrics such as reverberation time ($T_{60}$),
direct-to-reverberant ratio (DRR), and early-decay-time (EDT). $T_{60}$
measures the time taken for the sound pressure to decay by 60 decibels
(dB). The ratio of the sound pressure level of the direct sound to the
sound arriving after surface reflections is DRR [@drr_book]. The six
times the time taken for the sound pressure to decay by 10 dB
corresponds to EDT. We generate 2000 high-quality BIRs using many rays
with the geometric method [@geo_int1] for 166 real scenes not used to
train our networks in the ScanNet dataset. We compare the accuracy of
Listen2Scene with the BIRs computed using the geometric method on these
scenes.

In our Listen2Scene network, we pass the average sound absorption and
reflection coefficients at 500 Hz and 1000 Hz as input. In our
Listen2Scene-Full variant, the average coefficient over the 8-octave
bands between 62.5 Hz and 8000 Hz is given as input. Also, in our
Listen2Scene, we simplify the mesh to 2.5% of the original size. Our
Listen2Scene-Fix variant simplifies all the meshes to have a constant
number of faces (2000 faces). The motivation behind our approach is that
we empirically observed that instead of having a fixed size if we
simplify the meshes to 2.5% of the original size, the contextual
information is preserved better. We calculate the mean absolute acoustic
metrics error of the BIRs generated using our approach with materials
(Listen2Scene) and without materials (Listen2Scene-No-Mat),
Listen2Scene-ED, Listen2Scene-No-BIR, Listen2Scene-Fix and
Listen2Scene-Full. We report the average error from two channels in our
generated BIRs
(Table [\[tab:acoustic_param\]](#tab:acoustic_param){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:acoustic_param"}). Many prior learning-based approaches
are not capable of generating IRs for new scenes not used during
training [@luo] or generating BIRs for standard inputs taken by
physics-based BIR simulators [@fewshot]. MESH2IR [@mesh2ir] can generate
monaural IRs from 3D mesh models. Therefore, we compare the acoustic
metrics of MESH2IR separately with the left and right channels and
report the average error. We highlight the accuracy improvements in
Table [\[tab:acoustic_param\]](#tab:acoustic_param){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:acoustic_param"}. We can see that our Listen2Scene
outperforms MESH2IR and other variants of the Listen2Scene network.\

## Time-domain comparison

We plot additional time-domain representation of BIRs generated using a
geometric-based sound propagation approach [@geo_int1] and our proposed
Listen2Scene (Table  [\[tab:plot\]](#tab:plot){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:plot"}) for two different 3D scenes. We can see that the
amount of reverberation and the high-level structures of the BIRs
generated using our approach match BIRs generated using the
geometric-based method. Also, we can see that the ILD and ITD in our
generated BIRs match the BIRs from a geometric method. The mean absolute
error of the normalized BIRs generated using Listen2Scene is less than
$0.5$ x $10^{-2}$.

## Run time

We generated 2500 BIRs for a given 3D scene to calculate the run time.
Our network comprises a graph neural network (GNN) and a BIR generator
network. For a given 3D scene, we perform mesh encoding using GNN only
once, and we generate BIRs by varying source and listener positions. On
average, our network takes 0.21 seconds to encode the scene using GNN
and 0.023 milliseconds to generate a BIR. Therefore, on average, our
network takes 0.1 milliseconds per BIR to generate 2500 BIRs for a given
3D scene. On average, interactive image-based geometric sound
propagation algorithm [@image-based] takes around 0.15 seconds to
generate an impulse response [@fastrir]. Therefore, our Listen2Scene is
more than two orders of magnitude faster than image-based sound
propagation methods [@image-based].

# PERCEPTUAL EVALUATION

We perceptually evaluate the audio rendered using Listen2Scene and
compare them with prior learning-based and geometric-based sound
propagation algorithms. Our study aims to verify whether the audio
rendered using our Listen2Scene is plausible (with left and right
channels). We auralized three scenes with a single sound source and two
scenes with two sound sources from the ScanNet test dataset (more
details in the video).
Fig. [\[audio_scene\]](#audio_scene){reference-type="ref"
reference="audio_scene"} shows the snapshot of 5 scenes used to evaluate
the quality of our proposed audio rendering method. We created a
40-second video of each scene by moving the listener around the scene.
Fig. [8](#audio_path){reference-type="ref" reference="audio_path"} shows
the listener path in a 3D scene with two sound sources. We evaluate our
approach by adding sounds synthesized using different methods to the 3D
scene walkthrough: clean or dry sound (Clean), sound propagation effects
created using MESH2IR, Listen2Scene-No-Material, geometric-based method
and Listen2Scene. We also compared the reverberant speech created using
Listen2Scene-No-Material and Listen2Scene with the captured / real-world
IRs from two different scenes in the BRAS dataset
(Fig. [7](#bras_becnhmark){reference-type="ref"
reference="bras_becnhmark"}).

<figure id="audio_path" data-latex-placement="h!">
<embed src="samples/path.pdf" style="width:70.0%" />
<figcaption>The path covered by the listener in a real-world 3D scene
(studio apartment) with two sound sources. The listener path is shown in
blue arrows. The red circle represent the two sound sources in the 3D
scene. The source S1 is a speech signal from a speaker, and the source
S2 is water pouring from the kitchen.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Participants

We conducted our user study among the acoustic experts (13 participants)
and the participants from Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) (57
participants), an online crowdsourcing platform that can be used to
collect data from diverse participants. Since we have a limited number
of acoustic experts to evaluate our approach, we also evaluated using
AMT. We conducted our user study on $70$ participants ($47$ males and
$23$ females), of which 16 participants were between 18 and 24 years of
age, 48 participants were between 25 and 34 years of age, and 7
participants were above 35 years of age. We ensured the quality of our
evaluation by pre-screening the participants. As our pre-screening
questions, we asked the online participants whether they use headphones
with a laptop/desktop and only allowed them to proceed with the survey
if they answered yes. The average completion time of our user study is
20 minutes for each user. The just-noticeable-difference (JND) relative
reverberation time change is 5% - 25% [@jnd]. On average on each
rendered 40-second video, the reverberation time changes by 30%.
Therefore, under normal conditions, we expect the listeners to identify
the relative changes in the audio correctly.

## Benchmarks

We performed the following five benchmark comparisons in perceptual
evaluation. Our first four benchmarks compare 40-second-long
audio-rendered 3D environment walkthrough videos from our Listen2Scene
with baseline methods. In our last benchmark, we compare the real speech
with speech rendered using our Listen2Scene and
Listen2Scene-No-Material.\
**Clean vs. Listen2Scene:** We compared audio-rendered 3D scenes with
and without acoustic effects from Listen2Scene. We created two different
3D scene walkthrough videos for our experiment with a single sound
source and two sound sources. For a single sound source, we evaluate
whether our approach creates continuous and smooth acoustic effects when
moving around the scene and whether the user can perceive the indirect
acoustic effects. In the two sound sources walkthrough video, we
evaluate whether the relative distance between the two sound sources in
the rendered audio using our Listen2Scene matches the video.

**MESH2IR vs. Listen2Scene:** We auralized a 3D walkthrough video each
for a single source and two sources. We use the prior monaural audio
rendering method MESH2IR and our proposed binaural audio rendering
approach, Listen2Scene, for our comparison. We aim to investigate
whether the participants feel that the acoustic effects in the left and
right ears change smoothly and synchronously as the user walks into the
real-world 3D scene. In addition to distance, we investigate whether our
acoustic effects change smoothly with the direction of the source. We
also evaluated whether our approach is plausible even when there is more
than one source in the 3D scene.

**Listen2Scene-No-Material vs. Listen2Scene:** We auralized two
real-world 3D scenes with a single source from a medium-sized and a
large 3D scene, and another 3D scene with two sources. In this
experiment, we evaluate whether the reverberation effects from
Listen2Scene match closely with the environment when compared with
Listen2Scene-No-Material. Our goal is to evaluate the perceptual
benefits of adding material characteristics to our learning method. The
amount of reverberation varies with the size of the 3D scene, therefore
we compare the contribution of material to the plausibility of auralized
medium and large 3D scenes. In real environments, the listener hears
audio from multiple sound sources. Therefore, we evaluate the
plausibility of our approach when more than one source is played in the
3D walkthrough video.

**Geometric-method vs. Listen2Scene:** We auralized one real-world 3D
scene with two sources. In this experiment, we evaluate whether the
participants feel the Listen2Scene or the geometric-based sound
propagation [@geo_int1] is more plausible for the corresponding 3D scene
walkthrough video.

**BRAS benchmark:** We played reverberant speech created using captured
left channel IRs from the BRAS and left channel impulse responses
synthesized using our Listen2Scene and Listen2Scene-No-Material in two
different 3D scenes (Fig. [7](#bras_becnhmark){reference-type="ref"
reference="bras_becnhmark"}). We use single-channel IRs to remove
acoustic effects from ITD and ILD and make the participants focus on
reverberation effects corresponding to the complexity and shape of the
environment. We asked the participants to choose which speech sampled
auralized using our BIRs is closer to the real speech from the BRAS.

## Experiment and Results {#exp_res}

In our experiment, we randomly choose the location of two videos (left
or right) used for the comparison to eliminate bias from collected data
and ask the participants to rate from -2 to +2 based on which video
sounds more plausible, i.e. the way the sound varies in both ears when
the listener moves towards and away from the sound source. The
participants rate -2 if the left video sounds more plausible and vice
versa. If the participants have no preference, they rate 0. We group the
negative scores (-1 and -2) and positive scores (1 and 2) to choose the
participants' preferences.

Table [\[tab:userstudy\]](#tab:userstudy){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:userstudy"} summarises all the participants' responses.
We observe that 67% - 79% of the total participants find that the
auralized scenes with 1-2 sources using Listen2Scene are more plausible
than MESH2IR. Interestingly, 17% - 27% of total participants find that
just adding clean sound to a 3D scene video is more plausible. When we
further break down our results based on age, we observe that 42.86% to
71.43% of 35 or older participants prefer adding just clean sound to the
video. We believe that this might be caused by an increase in volume
from our approach when the listener moves too close to the speaker. All
of our participants older than 35 are from AMT, therefore we were not
able to get feedback from the participants after the studies. We also
observed that when there is more than one source in the 3D scene, the
relative sound variation of the sources based on their location is more
plausible with Listen2Scene, as compared to using dry sound or MESH2IR.
In large 3D models, where the $T_{60}$ tends to be higher, 66% of
participants feel Listen2Scene is more plausible than
Listen2Scene-No-Material. We also can see that 10% more participants
feel our learning-based approach is more plausible than the
geometric-based method. The BIRs generated using the learning-based
method smoothly change with the distance and listeners can feel a smooth
transition in audio when they move to different positions in the 3D
scene. From
Table [\[tab:bras_user\]](#tab:bras_user){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:bras_user"}, we can see that audio/speech rendered using
our Listens2Scene approach is closer to the real-world speech. Overall,
we notice that our approach creates plausible acoustic effects when
there are one or more sound sources in the 3D scene.

# CONCLUSION LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK

We present a material-aware learning-based sound propagation approach to
render thousands of audio samples on the fly for a given real 3D scene.
We propose a novel approach to handle material properties in our
network. Moreover, we show that adding material information
significantly improves the accuracy of BIR generation using our
Listen2Scene approach and is comparable to geometric propagation methods
or captured BIRs in terms of acoustic characteristics and perceptual
evaluation. Overall, our algorithm offers two orders of magnitude
performance improvement over interactive geometric sound propagation
methods.

Our approach has some limitations. The performance of our network
depends on the training data. We can train our network with real
captured BIRs, though it is challenging and expensive to capture a large
number of such BIRs. Currently, we use BIRs generated using geometric
algorithms for medium-sized 3D scenes in the ScanNet dataset for
training, and the overall accuracy of Listen2Scene is also a function of
the accuracy of the training data. Our approach is limited to static
real scenes. Our material classification methods assume that accurate
semantic labels for each object in the scene are known. It is possible
to consider sub-band acoustic material coefficients to further improve
the accuracy. However, the complexity of the graph representation of the
3D scene drastically increases, and we are limited by the GPU memory in
handling such complex graphs. Due to the limitation of the training
dataset used for training, the performance of our network has been
currently evaluated on small and medium-sized scenes. In future work, we
like to train and evaluate our approach on very large scenes. Since the
ScanNet dataset does not have the same 3D environment with different
structural changes, we are not able to train and evaluate different
structural detail resolutions. As part of future work, it would be
useful to analyze our learning-based sound propagation approach on
different structural detail resolutions.

[^1]: e-mail: jeran@umd.edu

[^2]: e-mail: dmanocha@umd.edu

[^3]: <https://drive.usercontent.google.com/download?id=1FnBadVRQvtV9jMrCz_F-U_YwjvxkK8s0&authuser=0>
